.TH ws_expirer 8 "March 2025" "SYSTEM ADMINISTRATION COMMANDS"

.SH NAME
ws_expirer \- expire and delete workspaces from a cronjob

.SH SYNOPSIS
.B ws_expirer
[\-h] [\-V] [\-F FILESYSTEMS] [\-s SINGLE_SPACE] [\-c] [\-\-configfile CONFIGFILE] [\-\-debug] [\-\-trace]

.SH DESCRIPTION
.PP
.B ws_expirer
is a system administration tool designed to be run from a cronjob. It handles
the expiration and deletion of workspaces based on their database entries and
perform cleanup of stray directories on the filesystems.

This tool operates in two phases:
.TP 1i
1.
Clean stray directories (directories without valid DB entries)
.TP 1i
2.
Process database entries (expire expired workspaces, delete old released/expired workspaces)

By default, the tool runs in dry-run mode and only shows what actions would be
performed without actually executing them. Use the
.B \-c
option to enable actual cleaning operations.

The tool sends reminder emails to users before their workspaces expire and
notifications to administrators when errors are encountered.

.SH OPTIONS
.TP
\-h
display usage help text
.TP
\-V
show version information
.TP
\-F FILESYSTEMS
comma\-separated list of filesystems to process. If not specified, all configured
filesystems are processed.
.TP
\-s SINGLE_SPACE
process only the specified workspace space (path of a single space)
.TP
\-c, \-\-cleaner
enable cleaner mode: actually perform deletions instead of dry-run
.TP
\-\-configfile CONFIGFILE
specify path to config file (default: /etc/ws.d, /etc/ws.conf)
.TP
\-\-debug
show debugging information
.TP
\-\-trace
show tracing information

.SH OPERATION MODES
.SS Dry-Run Mode (default)
When run without the
.B \-c
option,
.B ws_expirer
only simulates the cleanup operations and logs what would be done. This is the
recommended mode for testing configurations before enabling actual cleanup.

.SS Cleaner Mode
When the
.B \-c
option is specified, the tool performs actual file operations:
.RS
.IP \(bu 4
Move expired workspaces to deleted directories
.IP \(bu 4
Delete old released/expired workspaces beyond their keep time
.IP \(bu 4
Delete stray directories (no DB entry)
.IP \(bu 4
Remove old entries from the database
.RE

.SH EMAIL NOTIFICATIONS
The tool sends email notifications using the configured SMTP server:
.TP
Reminder emails
Sent to users when their workspace is approaching expiration
.TP
Error emails
Sent to administrators (configured via adminmail) when database errors or
other critical conditions are encountered

Email sending requires proper configuration of:
.RS
.IP \(bu 4
.B smtphost
in the configuration file
.IP \(bu 4
.B mail_from
address
.IP \(bu 4
Valid recipient email addresses in database entries
.RE

.SH LOGGING
The tool logs to both console (with colors) and optionally to daily-rotated
log files when
.B expirerlogpath
is configured in the configuration file.

Log entries include timestamps and categorize operations by:
.RS
.IP \(bu 4
Workspace expiration status (kept, expired, deleted)
.IP \(bu 4
Stray directory handling (valid, invalid)
.IP \(bu 4
Database entry problems
.IP \(bu 4
Email sending status
.RE

.SH PROCESS DETAILS
.SS Stray Directory Cleanup
The tool scans workspace spaces for directories that do not have corresponding
database entries. Directories matching the pattern
.I name\-timestamp
are moved to the deleted directory within the same space (for safety), then
processed for deletion if they have no corresponding DB entry.

Directories not matching the expected pattern (containing no dash) are logged
and ignored, requiring manual intervention.

.SS Database-Based Expiration
The tool processes all database entries in two passes:
.RS
.IP \(bu 4
.B Active workspaces: Check if expiration time has passed; if so, move to
deleted directory and mark as expired in DB
.IP \(bu 4
.B Deleted workspaces: Check if workspace has been in deleted state beyond
the configured
.B keeptime
; if so, remove DB entry and delete directory
.RE

User-released workspaces are kept for a short period (controlled by
.B releasekeeptime
, currently hardcoded to 3600 seconds) before deletion. Expired workspaces
are kept for the configured
.B keeptime
days before deletion.

.SH RETURN VALUES
.TP
0
Successful execution (regardless of dry-run or cleaner mode)
.TP
\-2
Configuration errors or fatal database problems

.SH EXAMPLES
.TP
Run in dry-run mode (default) for all filesystems:
.B ws_expirer
.TP
Run cleaner mode for all filesystems:
.B ws_expirer \-c
.TP
Run cleaner mode for specific filesystems:
.B ws_expirer \-c \-F ws1,ws2,ws3
.TP
Run cleaner mode for a single space:
.B ws_expirer \-c \-s /path/to/space
.TP
Setup daily cronjob (recommended):
.B 10 1 * * * /usr/sbin/ws_expirer \-c
.TP
Enable debug output:
.B ws_expirer \-c \-\-debug

.SH AUTHOR
Written by Holger Berger

.SH SEE ALSO
.BR ws_allocate (1),
.BR ws_release (1),
.BR ws_list (1),
.BR ws_restore (1),
.BR ws_extend (1),
.BR ws_find (1),
.BR ws_stat (1),
.BR ws_editdb (1),
.BR cron (8),
