.TH ws_editdb 8 "April 2026" "SYSTEM ADMINISTRATION COMMANDS"

.SH NAME
ws_editdb \- bulk-edit workspace database entries

.SH SYNOPSIS
.B ws_editdb
[\-h] [\-V] [\-F FILESYSTEM] [\-u USERNAME] [\-e] [\-p PATTERN] [\-v] [\-\-dry\-run] [\-\-not\-kidding] [\-\-add\-time DAYS] [\-\-add\-time\-expired DAYS] [\-\-ensure\-until DATE] [\-\-expire\-by DATE] [PATTERN]

.SH DESCRIPTION
.B ws_editdb
is an administrator-only tool for bulk-modifying workspace database entries by
pattern matching on workspace names and usernames. It is useful for tasks like
extending workspaces before a cluster maintenance window or enforcing a hard
expiry date across a group of workspaces.

.B By default the tool runs in dry-run mode
and only shows what would be done. Pass
.B \-\-not\-kidding
to actually apply the changes.

Only one modification option can be active at a time:
.B \-\-add\-time\fR,
.B \-\-add\-time\-expired\fR,
.B \-\-ensure\-until\fR,
or
.B \-\-expire\-by\fR.

.B PATTERN
is a unix glob expression, * matches all characters, please be aware that
quoting might be required by your shell.

.PP

.SH OPTIONS
.TP
\-h, \-\-help
display usage help text
.TP
\-V, \-\-version
show version information
.TP
\-F, \-\-filesystem FILESYSTEM
specify the filesystem to operate on. If not specified, all valid filesystems are processed.
.TP
\-u, \-\-username USERNAME
select workspaces belonging to the specified user. Root or admin only.
.TP
\-e, \-\-expired
operate on expired workspaces in the recovery area instead of active workspaces.
.TP
\-p, \-\-pattern PATTERN
pattern matching workspace names (glob syntax). Can also be given as a positional argument.
.TP
\-v, \-\-verbose
verbose listing.
.TP
\-\-dry\-run
default mode: only show what would be done without making changes.
.TP
\-\-not\-kidding
execute the actual modifications (disables dry-run mode).
.TP
\-\-add\-time DAYS
add the specified number of days to the expiration time of selected active workspaces.
.TP
\-\-add\-time\-expired DAYS
add the specified number of days to the expiration time of workspaces in the recovery area.
Use together with
.B \-e
to select expired workspaces.
.TP
\-\-ensure\-until DATE
extend workspaces that would expire before DATE so that they expire not earlier
than DATE (format: YYYY\-MM\-DD, time is set to 23:59:59).
Workspaces already expiring after DATE are not modified.
.TP
\-\-expire\-by DATE
shorten workspaces that would expire after DATE so that they expire no later
than DATE (format: YYYY\-MM\-DD, time is set to 00:00:00).
Workspaces already expiring before DATE are not modified.
.TP
\-\-config CONFIGFILE
path to config file.

.SH RESTRICTIONS
This tool requires root privileges. Non-root users can only use the tool with
a custom config file via
.B \-\-config\fR.

Only one modification option
.RB ( \-\-add\-time ,
.BR \-\-add\-time\-expired ,
.BR \-\-ensure\-until ,
.BR \-\-expire\-by )
can be used at a time.

.SH EXAMPLES
.TP
preview: show all workspaces matching a pattern without making changes:
.B ws_editdb "project*"
.TP
preview: extend all workspaces matching "project*" by 7 days:
.B ws_editdb --add-time 7 "project*"
.TP
apply: extend all workspaces matching "project*" by 7 days:
.B ws_editdb --add-time 7 --not-kidding "project*"
.TP
apply: ensure all workspaces last until at least 2026-06-01:
.B ws_editdb --ensure-until 2026-06-01 --not-kidding
.TP
apply: cap all workspaces to expire no later than 2026-05-01:
.B ws_editdb --expire-by 2026-05-01 --not-kidding
.TP
apply: give expired workspaces of user alice 30 more days in the recovery area:
.B ws_editdb -e -u alice --add-time-expired 30 --not-kidding

.SH AUTHOR
Written by Holger Berger

.SH SEE ALSO
ws_allocate, ws_release, ws_restore, ws_list, ws_find
