.TH ws_editdb 1 "March 2026" "USER COMMANDS"

.SH NAME
ws_editdb \- edit workspace database entries

.SH SYNOPSIS
.B ws_editdb
[\-h] [\-V] [\-F FILESYSTEM] [\-u USER] [\-e] [\-p PATTERN] [\-v] [\-\-dry\-run] [\-\-not\-kidding] [\-\-add\-time DAYS] [\-\-add\-time\-expired DAYS] [\-\-ensure\-until DATE] [\-\-expire\-by DATE] [\-\-debug] [\-\-trace] [PATTERN]

.SH DESCRIPTION
Edit workspace
.B database entries
with pattern matching. This tool is for administrators only.
The tool allows modifying expiration times and workspace states by selecting
entries via pattern matching on workspace names and usernames.

.B PATTERN
is a unix glob expression, * matches all characters, please be aware that quoting might be required
by your shell.

The idea of the
.B workspace
is to allow the administrator to keep control of filespace in working filesystems,
and to avoid the situations that data of past and finished projects/jobs is idling for
ever on disks. A user can create and dispose arbitrary number of workspaces, they are cheap,
and can be created e.g. for each job.

From the system side,
.B workspaces
will be deleted after beeing expired. A friendly user can release workspaces before the expiration
date using
.B ws_release
which will mark the
.B workspace
for future deletion.

This tool is designed to modify
.B database entries
for multiple workspaces in bulk operations. By default, the tool runs in dry-run mode
and only shows what actions would be performed without actually executing them.
Use 
.B --not-kidding
to enable actual modifications.

Only one modification mode can be active at a time:
.TP
.B --add-time
Add days to expiration time
.TP
.B --ensure-until 
Ensure workspaces expire not earlier than the specified date
.TP
.B --expire-by
Limit workspaces to expire no later than the specified date
.TP
.B --add-time-expired
Add days to expired time

.SH OPTIONS
.TP
\-h
display usage help text
.TP
\-V
show version information
.TP
\-F FILESYSTEM
specify the filesystem to operate on. If not specified, all valid filesystems are processed.
.TP
\-u USER
select workspaces belonging to a specific user. Only available for root or admin users.
.TP
\-e
show and operate on expired workspaces only
.TP
\-p PATTERN
pattern matching workspace names (glob syntax). The pattern can also be given as positional argument.
.TP
\-v
verbose listing
.TP
\-\-dry\-run
default mode: only show what would be done without making changes
.TP
\-\-not\-kidding
execute the actual modifications (disable dry-run mode)
.TP
\-\-add\-time DAYS
add the specified number of days to the expiration time of selected workspaces
.TP
\-\-add\-time\-expired DAYS
add the specified number of days to the expired time of selected workspaces
.TP
\-\-ensure\-until DATE
extend workspaces so that they expire not earlier than the specified date (format: YYYY\-MM\-DD, time set to 23:59:59)
.TP
\-\-expire\-by DATE
limit workspaces so that they expire no later than the specified date (format: YYYY\-MM\-DD, time set to 00:00:00)
.TP
\-\-config configfile
specify path to config file
.TP
\-\-debug
show debugging information
.TP
\-\-trace
show tracing information

.SH RESTRICTIONS
This tool is intended for administrative use only:
.TP
\-
Non-root users can only use the tool with their own configuration
.TP
\-
Modifying other users' workspaces requires root or admin privileges
.TP
\-
Only one modification option (--add-time, --add-time-expired, --ensure-until, or --expire-by) can be used at a time

.SH EXAMPLES
.TP
show all workspaces matching the pattern, without making changes (dry-run):
.B ws_editdb -p "experiment*"
.TP
add 7 days to the expiration time of all workspaces starting with "test":
.B ws_editdb --add-time 7 --not-kidding "test*"
.TP
ensure all workspaces last until at least 2025-12-31:
.B ws_editdb --ensure-until 2025-12-31 --not-kidding
.TP
extend expired workspaces by 30 days:
.B ws_editdb --add-time-expired 30 --expired --not-kidding
.TP
limit all workspaces to expire by 2025-06-30:
.B ws_editdb --expire-by 2025-06-30 --not-kidding
.TP
operate on a specific filesystem:
.B ws_editdb -F /home/ws --add-time 5 --not-kidding

.SH AUTHOR
Written by Holger Berger

.SH SEE ALSO
ws_allocate, ws_release, ws_restore, ws_list, ws_find
