.TH ws_prepare 8 "May 2026" "SYSTEM ADMINISTRATION COMMANDS"

.SH NAME
ws_prepare \- prepare workspace directory structure for a filesystem

.SH SYNOPSIS
.B ws_prepare
[\-h] [\-\-version] [\-\-config CONFIGFILE]

.SH DESCRIPTION
.B ws_prepare
is a tool to prepare the workspace directory structure for all configured
filesystems. It creates the required directories and sets their permissions
and ownership according to the configuration file.

The tool creates:
.RS
.IP \(bu 4
Database directory (configured via
.B database
)
.IP \(bu 4
Database deleted directory (configured via
.B database
/deleted)
.IP \(bu 4
ws_db_magic file in database directory
.IP \(bu 4
Workspace spaces directories (configured via
.B spaces
)
.IP \(bu 4
Deleted workspace directories for each space
.RE

.B Important:
This tool only creates directories if they do not exist. If a directory
already exists, it does not check or modify its permissions or ownership.

.PP

.SH OPTIONS
.TP
\-h, \-\-help
display usage help text
.TP
\-V, \-\-version
show version information
.TP
\-\-config CONFIGFILE
path to config file. Only effective for root or when running in user mode.
.TP

.SH EXAMPLES
.TP
prepare workspace directories for all configured filesystems:
.B ws_prepare
.TP
prepare workspace directories with custom config:
.B ws_prepare --config /etc/ws.d/custom.conf

.SH USAGE NOTES
.B ws_prepare
is typically used for initial setup, testing, or when adding a new filesystem
to the configuration. It should be run as root to allow changing ownership
to the configured
.B dbuid:dbgid
values.

Permissions on created directories are set to:
.RS
.IP \(bu 4
Database and workspace directories: 0755
.IP \(bu 4
Database deleted and workspace deleted directories: 0755
.RE

Ownership on all created directories is set to
.B dbuid:dbgid
as configured in the configuration file.

.SH EXIT CODES
.TP
0
Success - all directories exist or were created successfully
.TP
1
Error - not running as root
.TP
2
Error - no valid config file found

.SH FILES
.TP
.I /etc/ws.d
default directory for configuration files
.TP
.I /etc/ws.conf
default configuration file (used if /etc/ws.d does not exist)

.SH SEE ALSO
.BR ws_validate_config (8),
.BR ws (7),
.BR ws_expirer (8)

.SH AUTHOR
Written by Holger Berger
