.TH WS 7 "May 2026" "HPC-WORKSPACE"

.SH NAME
ws \- hpc-workspace directory management system

.SH DESCRIPTION
The hpc-workspace system provides a set of tools for managing temporary
.B workspaces
\ \(em directories with an associated expiration date, created on behalf of a user
to prevent high-performance parallel storage on HPC systems from being filled
uncontrolled with stale data.

Workspaces allow the operations team to offload storage management tasks to
users, load-balance across multiple filesystems, and hide filesystem details
from users. They also allow data migration between filesystems without
affecting the user's workflow.

A
.I workspace
is a directory with the following properties:

.IP \(bu 2
A user-selected
.I ID
(unique name)
.IP \(bu 2
A lifetime chosen by the user, bounded by administrator limits
.IP \(bu 2
Configurable permissions (private, group-readable, group-writable, or shared
via ACLs)
.IP \(bu 2
Underlying storage quality transparent to the user

.PP
A workspace is intended as the location where large data resides during a
job or job campaign. It is not the place to store source files or to
archive data. Every workspace will eventually be deleted upon expiration,
so users must track and manage their workspaces accordingly. By enforcing
expiration, the system prevents any single user from occupying expensive
storage indefinitely.

.SH LIFE CYCLE
The lifecycle of a workspace proceeds through several stages:

.IP \(bu 2
.B Creation:
A workspace is created with
.BR ws_allocate "(1),"
which returns the path to the new directory. If a workspace with the same
ID already exists, it is reused without resetting the duration.
.IP \(bu 2
.B Active use:
The workspace exists for the requested duration. The user may extend the
lifetime using
.BR ws_extend "(1)"
or
.BR ws_allocate "(1), "
consuming an extension (subject to administrator limits). The workspace may
be shared with other group members or individual users.
.IP \(bu 2
.B Expiration or release:
When the workspace expires (or is explicitly released with
.BR ws_release "(1), "
it becomes inaccessible under its original ID and is marked for deletion.
Released workspaces are candidates for earlier deletion than expired ones.
.IP \(bu 2
.B Restoration or deletion:
Before final deletion, released workspaces may be restored using
.BR ws_restore "(1)"
if space permits. The restored data is placed into an existing target
workspace. Actual deletion typically occurs during a nightly cleanup run.

.PP

.SH TOOLS

.TP
.BR ws_allocate "(1)"
Create, extend, or modify a workspace
.TP
.BR ws_list "(1)"
List workspaces and available filesystems
.TP
.BR ws_stat "(1)"
Show disk usage statistics for workspaces
.TP
.BR ws_find "(1)"
Print the path of a workspace by ID
.TP
.BR ws_register "(1)"
Create symbolic links to workspaces in a given directory
.TP
.BR ws_release "(1)"
Release (mark for expiration/deletion) a workspace
.TP
.BR ws_restore "(1)"
Restore a previously released workspace
.TP
.BR ws_extend "(1)"
Extend the lifetime of a workspace
.TP
.BR ws_share "(1)"
Share a workspace with other users or groups via ACLs
.TP
.BR ws_send_ical "(1)"
Send a calendar reminder for workspace expiration

.SH WORKSPACE TYPES

.SS Private Workspaces
The default workspace type. Only the creating user can see and access the
workspace.

.SS Group Workspaces
Workspaces created with
.B \-g
are group-readable (with the group sticky bit set). Created with
.B \-G
they become group-writable as well, allowing group members to extend them
on behalf of the owner. Group workspaces are visible to other members of
the same group via
.BR ws_list " \-g"

.SS Shared Workspaces
Using
.BR ws_share "(1),"
the owner can grant read or read-write access to individual users or
groups via UNIX ACLs. ACL support must be available on the underlying
filesystem. The access is applied recursively to all files and directories
in the workspace.

.SH CONFIGURATION
Users may set default values in
.B ~/.ws_user.conf
\ (YAML format) to avoid repeating common options on the command line.
Supported keys are:

.TP
.B mail
Default email address for reminder notifications
.TP
.B duration
Default workspace lifetime in days
.TP
.B reminder
Default number of days before expiration to send a reminder
.TP
.B groupname
Default group for group workspaces

.PP
All defaults can be overridden by command-line options.

.SH TYPICAL USAGE

In a batch job script, a workspace is allocated and its path
returned to the caller:

.EX
SCRDIR=$(ws_allocate MySpace 10)
cd "$SCRDIR"
.EE

The variable
.B SCRDIR
receives the path to a workspace named "MySpace" that will live for 10 days.
Because
.B ws_allocate
reuses an existing workspace with the same ID without altering its duration,
this pattern is safe to use in job series that share data across runs.

Before the workspace expires, the user may send a reminder:

.EX
ws_send_ical user@example.com MySpace 3
.EE

to receive an iCalendar notification three days before expiration.

When work is complete, the workspace should be released to free resources:

.EX
ws_release MySpace
.EE

.SH SEE ALSO
.BR ws_allocate "(1),"
.BR ws_list "(1),"
.BR ws_stat "(1),"
.BR ws_find "(1),"
.BR ws_register "(1),"
.BR ws_release "(1),"
.BR ws_restore "(1),"
.BR ws_extend "(1),"
.BR ws_share "(1),"
.BR ws_send_ical "(1)"

.SH DOCUMENTATION

you can find a more detailed userguide at 
.UR https://github.com/holgerBerger/hpc-workspace-v2/blob/master/documentation/user-guide.md
.UE

.SH BUG REPORTING 

you can report bugs or give feedback at
.UR https://github.com/holgerBerger/hpc-workspace-v2/issues
.UE

.SH AUTHOR
Written by Holger Berger
