.TH ws_find 1 "April 2026" "USER COMMANDS"

.SH NAME
ws_find \- print the path of a workspace

.SH SYNOPSIS
.B ws_find
[\-h] [\-V] [\-F FILESYSTEM] [\-g] [\-u USERNAME] [\-n NAME] WORKSPACE

.SH DESCRIPTION
Print the path of an existing
.B workspace
by name. This is useful as an alternative to
.B ws_allocate
when you want to locate an existing workspace without accidentally creating one.
By default all filesystems are searched. The search can be restricted to a specific filesystem
with
.B \-F
\&.

The idea of the
.B workspace
is to allow the administrator to keep control of filespace in working filesystems,
and to avoid the situations that data of past and finished projects/jobs is idling for
ever on disks. A user can create and dispose arbitrary number of workspaces, they are cheap,
and can be created e.g. for each job.

From the system side,
.B workspaces
will be deleted after being expired. A friendly user can release workspaces before the expiration
date using
.B ws_release
which will mark the
.B workspace
for future deletion and make the data unavailable.

Deletion is probably a task done once a night and not immediately.

If a
.B workspace
was forgotten and expired, it might make sense to contact the administrator,
as he probably can restore a workspace for some time, if disk space is not low.

.PP

.SH OPTIONS
.TP
\-h, \-\-help
display usage help text
.TP
\-V, \-\-version
show version
.TP
\-F, \-\-filesystem FILESYSTEM
select the filesystem to search for the workspace.
See
.B ws_list \-l
for a list of available filesystems.
.TP
\-g, \-\-groupname
search for group workspaces in addition to own workspaces.
.TP
\-u, \-\-username USERNAME
search workspaces of the specified user instead of the calling user.
.TP
\-n, \-\-name NAME
workspace name to search for. Can also be given as a positional argument.
.TP
\-\-config CONFIGFILE
path to configfile, for root only or for unprivileged installations.

.SH EXAMPLES
.TP
get the path of a workspace:
.B ws_find myworkspace
.TP
search for a workspace on a specific filesystem:
.B ws_find -F scratch myworkspace
.TP
search for a group workspace:
.B ws_find -g myworkspace
.TP
search workspaces of another user:
.B ws_find -u alice myworkspace

.SH AUTHOR
Written by Holger Berger

.SH SEE ALSO
ws_allocate, ws_release, ws_list, ws_restore
