.TH ws_list 1 "April 2026" "USER COMMANDS"

.SH NAME
ws_list \- list workspaces

.SH SYNOPSIS
.B ws_list
[\-h] [\-V] [\-F FILESYSTEM] [\-g] [\-l] [\-L] [\-s] [\-t] [\-T] [\-v] [\-e] [\-r] [\-N] [\-R] [\-C] [\-P] [\-u USERNAME] [\-p PATTERN] [PATTERN]

.SH DESCRIPTION
List
.B workspaces
of the calling user.
The output can be restricted to
.B workspaces
in a certain FILESYSTEM, matching a certain PATTERN, and can be sorted according to different criteria.

.B PATTERN
is a unix glob expression, * matches all characters, please be aware that quoting might be required
by your shell.

The idea of the
.B workspace
is to allow the administrator to keep control of filespace in working filesystems,
and to avoid the situations that data of past and finished projects/jobs is idling for
ever on disks. A user can create and dispose arbitrary number of workspaces, they are cheap,
and can be created e.g. for each job.

From the system side,
.B workspaces
will be deleted after being expired. A friendly user can release workspaces before the expiration
date using
.B ws_release
which will mark the
.B workspace
for future deletion.

Deletion is probably a task done once a night and not immediately.

If a
.B workspace
was forgotten and expired, it might make sense to contact the administrator,
as he probably can restore a workspace for some time, if disk space is not low.
Check if
.B ws_restore
is available allowing you to restore workspaces on your own.

.PP

.SH OPTIONS
.TP
\-h, \-\-help
display usage help text
.TP
\-V, \-\-version
show version
.TP
\-l, \-\-listfilesystems
list the available filesystems, only filesystems the user has list access to will be shown.
The shown order is the order workspaces are searched in, from top to bottom.
.TP
\-L, \-\-listfilesystemdetails
list the available filesystems you have list access to with properties like maximum duration and number of extensions granted
as well as retention time after expiration or release, as well as permissions like right to allocate, extend and restore.
Add
.B \-v
to see an explanation of the fields.
.TP
\-F, \-\-filesystem FILESYSTEM
select the filesystem to list the workspaces from.
.TP
\-g, \-\-groupname
show group-workspaces visible for current group in addition to own workspaces.
You can extend a visible workspace on behalf of the owner if the workspace is writable,
either as it was created with
.B ws_allocate \-G <groupname>
or because it was made writable later with
.B chmod
. See
.B ws_allocate
manpage for details.
.TP
\-u, \-\-username USERNAME
only show workspaces for the specified user.
.TP
\-e, \-\-expired
show expired workspaces. Use together with
.B ws_restore
to list names available for restoration.
.TP
\-s, \-\-short
short listing, only workspace names will be listed.
.TP
\-t, \-\-terse
terse listing, less information is shown.
.TP
\-T, \-\-table
table listing, supports \-t and sorting. Remaining time is color-coded: red for less than 3 days, orange for less than 7 days.
Most useful as
.B \-RTt
.TP
\-v, \-\-verbose
verbose listing, all information is shown.
.TP
\-P, \-\-permissions
show permissions of workspace directory.
.TP
\-N, \-\-name
sort by workspace name.
.TP
\-R, \-\-remaining
sort by remaining time of workspaces.
.TP
\-C, \-\-creation
sort by creation date of workspaces.
.TP
\-r, \-\-reverted
invert the sorting of \-N, \-C or \-R.
.TP
\-p, \-\-pattern PATTERN
pattern matching workspace name (glob syntax). Can also be given as a positional argument.
.TP
\-\-config CONFIGFILE
path to configfile, for root only or for unprivileged installations.

.SH EXAMPLES
.TP
list all workspaces, unsorted:
.B ws_list
.TP
list available filesystems:
.B ws_list -l
.TP
list available filesystems with details:
.B ws_list -L
.TP
list all workspaces, sorted by remaining time, shortest first:
.B ws_list -R
.TP
list all workspaces, sorted by creation time, oldest last:
.B ws_list -C -r
.TP
list a specific workspace:
.B ws_list myworkspace
.TP
list workspaces starting with "experiment":
.B ws_list "experiment*"
.TP
list workspaces in terse table format, shortest remaining days first (with color coding of remaining days)
.B ws_list -RTt
.TP
list expired workspaces available for restoration:
.B ws_list -e

.SH AUTHOR
Written by Holger Berger

.SH SEE ALSO
ws_stat, ws_allocate, ws_release, ws_restore, ws_find
