.TH ws_restore 1 "April 2026" "USER COMMANDS"

.SH NAME
ws_restore \- restore a workspace that was released or expired but is still in recovery area

.SH SYNOPSIS
.B ws_restore
[\-h] [\-V] [\-F FILESYSTEM] [\-u USERNAME] [\-b] \-l [PATTERN]

.B ws_restore
[\-h] [\-V] [\-F FILESYSTEM] \-\-delete\-data NAME

.B ws_restore
[\-h] [\-V] [\-F FILESYSTEM] [\-n NAME] [\-t TARGET] NAME TARGET

.SH DESCRIPTION
After a
.B workspace
was released by the user or has expired, it is (depending on administrator policy) kept for a
while in an inaccessible area of the filesystem before being finally deleted.
In this case it can be restored with this command.

Use
.B ws_restore \-l
to list restorable workspaces and obtain the NAME to pass to
.B ws_restore
\&. Note that this name is
.B not
identical to the name shown by
.B ws_list
\(em it contains the username and a timestamp suffix.

TARGET must be an already-existing workspace.
.B ws_restore
restores the data into it; it does not create a new workspace.

.B ws_restore \-\-delete\-data NAME
permanently deletes the data of an already-released workspace without restoring it first.
This is useful when you need to free quota. Use with care.

.B ws_restore
cannot be automated; it must be executed in an interactive session by a human.

The idea of the
.B workspace
is to allow the administrator to keep control of filespace in working filesystems,
and to avoid the situations that data of past and finished projects/jobs is idling for
ever on disks. A user can create and dispose arbitrary number of workspaces, they are cheap,
and can be created e.g. for each job.

From the system side,
.B workspaces
will be deleted after being expired. A friendly user can release workspaces before the expiration
date using
.B ws_release
which will mark the
.B workspace
for deletion and make the data unavailable.

Deletion is probably a task done once a night and not immediately. How long a workspace is kept
in the recovery area before final deletion can be seen with
.B ws_list \-L
\&.

.PP

.SH OPTIONS
.TP
\-h, \-\-help
display usage help text
.TP
\-V, \-\-version
show version
.TP
\-l, \-\-list
list available workspaces for restoration. An optional PATTERN (glob syntax) can be given
to filter the output. Shows unavailability date and time remaining until final deletion.
.TP
\-b, \-\-brief
shorter output in list mode, omitting unavailability date information.
.TP
\-n, \-\-name NAME
name of the workspace to restore, as printed by
.B ws_restore \-l
\&. Can also be given as the first positional argument.
.TP
\-t, \-\-target TARGET
name of the existing target workspace to restore the data into.
Can also be given as the second positional argument.
.TP
\-F, \-\-filesystem FILESYSTEM
select the filesystem to search workspaces in.
See
.B ws_list \-l
for a list of available filesystems.
.TP
\-u, \-\-username USERNAME
for root and admins only: operate on workspaces of the specified user.
.TP
\-\-delete\-data
delete the data of the named workspace instead of restoring it.
The workspace
.B cannot be recovered
after this. There is a 5-second grace period during which the operation can be
interrupted with CTRL-C. Use with care.
.TP
\-c, \-\-config CONFIGFILE
path to configfile, for root only or for unprivileged installations.

.SH EXAMPLES
.TP
list restorable workspaces:
.B ws_restore -l
.TP
list restorable workspaces starting with "Data":
.B ws_restore -l "Data*"
.TP
restore a workspace (NAME as printed by ws_restore -l) into existing workspace SAVED:
.B ws_restore charlie-Data2025-1760123101 SAVED
.TP
permanently delete data of a released workspace to free quota:
.B ws_restore --delete-data charlie-Data2025-1760123101

.SH AUTHOR
Written by Holger Berger

.SH SEE ALSO
ws_allocate, ws_release, ws_list, ws_find
