.TH ws_register 1 "April 2026" "USER COMMANDS"

.SH NAME
ws_register \- maintain a directory of symlinks to workspaces

.SH SYNOPSIS
.B ws_register
[\-h] [\-V] [\-F FILESYSTEM] [\-d DIRECTORY] DIRECTORY

.SH DESCRIPTION
Create symbolic links to all
.B workspaces
of the calling user inside DIRECTORY, organized into subdirectories per filesystem.
Links pointing to workspaces that no longer exist are removed automatically,
keeping the directory in sync.

This is useful if you want to browse or access your workspaces conveniently
through a fixed location in your home directory.

The action can be restricted to
.B workspaces
in a certain FILESYSTEM with
.B \-F
\&.

The idea of the
.B workspace
is to allow the administrator to keep control of filespace in working filesystems,
and to avoid the situations that data of past and finished projects/jobs is idling for
ever on disks. A user can create and dispose arbitrary number of workspaces, they are cheap,
and can be created e.g. for each job.

From the system side,
.B workspaces
will be deleted after being expired. A friendly user can release workspaces before the expiration
date using
.B ws_release
which will mark the
.B workspace
for future deletion and make the data unavailable.

Deletion is probably a task done once a night and not immediately.

If a
.B workspace
was forgotten and expired, it might make sense to contact the administrator,
as he probably can restore a workspace for some time, if disk space is not low.

.PP

.SH OPTIONS
.TP
\-h, \-\-help
display usage help text
.TP
\-V, \-\-version
show version
.TP
\-F, \-\-filesystem FILESYSTEM
restrict links to workspaces in the specified filesystem.
See
.B ws_list \-l
for a list of available filesystems.
.TP
\-d, \-\-directory DIRECTORY
target directory for the symlinks. Can also be given as a positional argument.
.TP
\-\-config CONFIGFILE
path to configfile, for root only or for unprivileged installations.

.SH EXAMPLES
.TP
create and maintain symlinks to all workspaces in ~/ws_links:
.B ws_register ~/ws_links
.TP
restrict links to a specific filesystem:
.B ws_register -F scratch ~/ws_links

.SH AUTHOR
Written by Holger Berger

.SH SEE ALSO
ws_allocate, ws_release, ws_list, ws_find, ws_restore
