.TH ws_release 1 "April 2026" "USER COMMANDS"

.SH NAME
ws_release \- release a workspace directory and free the workspace name

.SH SYNOPSIS
.B ws_release
[\-h] [\-V] [\-F FILESYSTEM] [\-n NAME] [\-u USERNAME] [\-\-delete\-data] NAME

.SH DESCRIPTION
Release the
.B workspace
NAME for the calling user.
Releasing makes the workspace data unavailable and frees the NAME for reuse.
The data is not deleted immediately and can be recovered using
.B ws_restore
as long as it has not been finally deleted. A released workspace gets deleted a lot
earlier than an expired one, e.g. during the next night.

Data in a released workspace can still account for quota usage. Delete the data before
releasing, or use the
.B \-\-delete\-data
option. You can see the retention time after release with
.B ws_list \-L
\&.

The idea of the
.B workspace
is to allow the administrator to keep control of filespace in working filesystems,
and to avoid the situations that data of past and finished projects/jobs is idling for
ever on disks. A user can create and dispose arbitrary number of workspaces, they are cheap,
and can be created e.g. for each job.

From the system side,
.B workspaces
will be deleted after being expired. A friendly user can release workspaces before the expiration
date using
.B ws_release
which will mark the
.B workspace
for deletion and make the data unavailable.

Deletion is probably a task done once a night and not immediately.

If a
.B workspace
was forgotten and expired or released in error, check
.B ws_restore \-l
which allows you to restore workspaces on your own.

.PP

.SH OPTIONS
.TP
\-h, \-\-help
display usage help text
.TP
\-V, \-\-version
show version
.TP
\-F, \-\-filesystem FILESYSTEM
select the filesystem to release the workspace from.
See
.B ws_list \-l
for a list of available filesystems and their search order.
.TP
\-n, \-\-name NAME
name of workspace, can also be given as positional parameter.
.TP
\-u, \-\-username USERNAME
for root only: release a workspace of the specified user, with the ID as seen in
.B ws_list
\&.
.TP
\-\-delete\-data
delete all data in the workspace immediately. The workspace
.B cannot be recovered
after this. There is a 5-second grace period during which the operation can be
interrupted with CTRL-C. Use with care.
.TP
\-c, \-\-config CONFIGFILE
path to configfile, for root only or for unprivileged installations.

.SH EXAMPLES
.TP
release a workspace:
.B ws_release myworkspace
.TP
release a workspace and immediately delete all data:
.B ws_release --delete-data myworkspace

.SH AUTHOR
Written by Holger Berger

.SH SEE ALSO
ws_allocate, ws_list, ws_find, ws_restore
