.TH ws_stat 1 "April 2026" "USER COMMANDS"

.SH NAME
ws_stat \- show disk usage statistics for workspaces

.SH SYNOPSIS
.B ws_stat
[\-h] [\-V] [\-F FILESYSTEM] [\-u USERNAME] [\-g] [\-v] [\-N] [\-R] [\-C] [\-r] [\-t THREADS] [\-p PATTERN] [PATTERN]

.SH DESCRIPTION
Show disk usage statistics for
.B workspaces
of the calling user: number of files, symlinks, directories, and total size in bytes.
Without arguments all workspaces are scanned; a glob PATTERN can be given to limit
the output to matching workspace IDs.

By default only own workspaces are shown. Add
.B \-g
to also include group workspaces visible to the current group.

The output can be sorted and restricted to a certain FILESYSTEM.
Add
.B \-v
to also print the scan time and throughput per workspace.

.B PATTERN
is a unix glob expression, * matches all characters, please be aware that quoting might be required
by your shell.

On Lustre filesystems, file sizes are read from metadata if possible, which is cheaper than
.B stat()
calls and therefore faster than
.B du.

The scan uses parallel directory traversal. The number of threads defaults to the number of
CPU cores and can be overridden with
.B \-t
or the
.B WS_THREADS
environment variable.

The idea of the
.B workspace
is to allow the administrator to keep control of filespace in working filesystems,
and to avoid the situations that data of past and finished projects/jobs is idling for
ever on disks. A user can create and dispose arbitrary number of workspaces, they are cheap,
and can be created e.g. for each job.

From the system side,
.B workspaces
will be deleted after being expired. A friendly user can release workspaces before the expiration
date using
.B ws_release
which will mark the
.B workspace
for future deletion.

Deletion is probably a task done once a night and not immediately.

If a
.B workspace
was forgotten and expired, it might make sense to contact the administrator,
as he probably can restore a workspace for some time, if disk space is not low.
Check if
.B ws_restore
is available allowing you to restore workspaces on your own.

.PP

.SH OPTIONS
.TP
\-h, \-\-help
display usage help text
.TP
\-V, \-\-version
show version and build information
.TP
\-F, \-\-filesystem FILESYSTEM
select the filesystem to list the workspaces from.
See
.B ws_list \-l
for a list of available filesystems.
.TP
\-u, \-\-username USERNAME
only show workspaces for the specified user.
.TP
\-g, \-\-groupname
show group-workspaces visible for the current group in addition to own workspaces.
.TP
\-v, \-\-verbose
verbose output: also print scan time in milliseconds and throughput in KFiles/sec per workspace.
.TP
\-N, \-\-name
sort by workspace name.
.TP
\-R, \-\-remaining
sort by remaining time of workspaces.
.TP
\-C, \-\-creation
sort by creation date of workspaces.
.TP
\-r, \-\-reverted
invert the sorting of \-N, \-C or \-R.
.TP
\-t THREADS, \-\-threads THREADS
number of threads for parallel directory traversal.
Defaults to the number of CPU cores. Minimum enforced value is 4.
The
.B WS_THREADS
environment variable can also be used; the
.B \-t
option takes precedence.
.TP
\-p, \-\-pattern PATTERN
pattern matching workspace name (glob syntax). Can also be given as a positional argument.
.TP
\-\-config CONFIGFILE
path to configfile, for root only or for unprivileged installations.

.SH EXAMPLES
.TP
show statistics for all workspaces:
.B ws_stat
.TP
show statistics for workspaces matching a pattern:
.B ws_stat "myproject*"
.TP
show statistics sorted by remaining time, with scan throughput:
.B ws_stat -R -v

.SH AUTHOR
Written by Holger Berger

.SH SEE ALSO
ws_list, ws_allocate, ws_release, ws_restore, ws_find
