.TH ws_send_ical 1 "April 2026" "USER COMMANDS"

.SH NAME
ws_send_ical \- send a calendar invitation by email for a workspace expiration date

.SH SYNOPSIS
.B ws_send_ical
[\-h] [\-F FILESYSTEM] [\-n NAME] [\-m MAILADDRESS] NAME

.SH DESCRIPTION
Sends an iCal calendar invitation to the specified mail address as a reminder of the
expiration date of a
.B workspace
\&. The calendar entry can be imported into most calendar applications.

If no mail address is given on the command line, the address from
.B ~/.ws_user.conf
is used. If no mail address can be found, the command will abort.

If the workspace name matches multiple filesystems, use
.B \-F
to specify the filesystem.

The idea of the
.B workspace
is to allow the administrator to keep control of filespace in working filesystems,
and to avoid the situations that data of past and finished projects/jobs is idling for
ever on disks. A user can create and dispose arbitrary number of workspaces, they are cheap,
and can be created e.g. for each job.

From the system side,
.B workspaces
will be deleted after being expired. A friendly user can release workspaces before the expiration
date using
.B ws_release
which will mark the
.B workspace
for future deletion and make the data unavailable for the user.

Deletion is probably a task done once a night and not immediately.

.PP

.SH OPTIONS
.TP
\-h, \-\-help
display usage help text
.TP
\-F, \-\-filesystem FILESYSTEM
filesystem where the workspace is located. Required if the workspace name exists in
multiple filesystems.
See
.B ws_list \-l
for a list of available filesystems.
.TP
\-n, \-\-name NAME
name of the workspace to send the calendar entry for. Can also be given as the first
positional argument.
.TP
\-m, \-\-mail MAILADDRESS
mail address to send the calendar invitation to. If not given, the address from
.B ~/.ws_user.conf
is used.
.TP
\-\-config CONFIGFILE
path to configfile, for root only or for unprivileged installations.

.SH FILES
.B
~/.ws_user.conf
user config file. If
.B mail
is set here, it will be used as the default mail address when
.B \-m
is not given on the command line.

.SH EXAMPLES
.TP
send a calendar invitation for workspace myworkspace:
.B ws_send_ical myworkspace -m user@domain
.TP
use mail address from ~/.ws_user.conf:
.B ws_send_ical myworkspace

.SH AUTHOR
Written by Thomas Beisel and Maria Hampel

.SH SEE ALSO
ws_allocate, ws_release, ws_list, ws_find, ws_restore
